this video is sponsored and approved by
curiosity stream how do you find
something when you don't know what
you're looking for not only that you
don't know where to look for it either
that is exactly what faced particle
physicists in the past 50 years during
their hunt for the elusive Higgs boson
okay so by now you've hopefully seen my
other video the first one in this series
that talked about the history of the
theory of the Higgs boson and where it
came from all the way up to the 1960s so
after those now very famous three papers
were published in 1964 raising this idea
of this invisible field that permeated
all of space that put drag onto
particles to give the mass and also I
should say here I don't think I made
this clear in my previous video the
Higgs field is what gives the tiny
fundamental particles the the smallest
things you can get down to it gives them
mass it doesn't necessarily give us mass
so for example a proton which is sort of
the particles that you find in atoms
that make up us and made of three of
these tiny fundamental particles called
quarks and if you add up the mass of all
three of those individual particles that
they get from this Higgs field it's not
as massive as the proton because you
also have a huge amount of energy that
goes into binding those three particles
together and energy is equivalent to
mass e equals MC squared that famous
equation so a lot of our mass that comes
from atoms and protons and neutrons
comes from the binding energy of holding
those fundamental particles together but
those fundamental particles have mass
because of the Higgs field that was
predicted in 1964 then in 1966 Peter
Higgs came out with another paper and
said that if this Higgs field is real
and that is the real mechanism that
gives these fundamental particles mass
then there should be what's called a
boson that communicates that information
to us so a boson is anything that
communicates information about a field
so a photon of light is a boson because
it communicates something to us about
the electro magnetic field and so in
1966 Peter Higgs suggested that maybe if
we were going to prove that the Higgs
field existed then we should look for
the Higgs boson now this boson was
predicted to be massive
now when I say massive I mean massive to
a particle physicist you
like we're not talking massive on human
scales or even asked your physical
skills you know as an astrophysicist
massive to me means like a million times
heavier than the Sun whereas massive to
a particle physicist is like two hundred
thousand times heavier than an electron
so how do we actually go about detecting
these massive Higgs bosons you know are
they always there in the air around us
or do we have to produce them somehow in
order to be able to detect that they're
there well lucky me got to go to CERN
about six weeks ago now and I actually
got to sit down and chat with a load of
particle physicists and you bet I asked
them this question so everything we do
here at CERN happens around us anyway so
cosmic rays that come into our
atmosphere create these kind of particle
collisions and so Higgs bosons are
forming in our atmosphere and they're
happening in lots of other Astrophysical
situations but we want to be able to
measure them and the best way to measure
them is to do it in a very controlled
way and so here at CERN we have the
Large Hadron Collider our favorite
particle accelerator and we take protons
and we accelerate them to the speed of
light we smash them together and we use
equals mc-squared
to take this energy and create new
matter the Higgs bosons are created so
it's a statistical chance of what will
be created we never know but our
calculations tell us how often it should
happen and then again they will change
into other particles because they don't
live for very long they're what we call
unstable so we're not necessarily
looking for the Higgs boson directly
we're looking to make one and then look
for the things that it decays into that
we can detect but if we're gonna do this
we have to put enough energy in so that
the energy we get out is enough to make
one of these particles remember energy
and mass are equivalent so the way that
particle physicists usually say how
massive a particle is is to refer to it
in terms of energy so they'll up and say
that an electron for example is 0.51 one
mega electron volt so mega meaning a
million and electro
volts is a unit of energy it's
equivalent to naught point naught naught
naught naught naught naught naught
naught 8 joules it's very very tiny unit
of energy and really they should write
mega electron volts divided by C squared
because that's how you technically
convert it to like kilograms but it's
much easier and shorthand to write it as
just mega electron volts and everyone
knows the you're supposed to just divide
by C squared so how this works with the
Higgs boson is that you make a Higgs
boson and then it decays into something
different so for example maybe a pair of
particles a particle and it's
antiparticle and you measure how much
energy those two particles have and you
work backwards from there to work out
how much energy the thing had that
created them so if there's one particle
that's created that pair of anti
particles like crazy we should see this
huge big peak at the energy or mass of
that particle and if that peak is an
energy we've never seen before
then we know that we've discovered a new
particle
the thing is though particle physicists
didn't know the exact mass or energy of
the Higgs boson so they didn't exactly
know where to look there was this huge
range of energies that it could be in
and they didn't know how big of an
energy maybe could have and how far they
had to push it so the much of the focus
from the 1960s onwards was building ever
bigger and bigger particle accelerators
in the hope of getting to higher and
higher energies so that maybe they would
be able to produce and then detect a
Higgs boson now spoiler alert here just
for context so that when I'm saying
numbers later in the video you
understand they've sort of like where
we're trying to get to when it was
eventually discovered the Higgs boson
had an energy or a mass of a hundred and
twenty-five Giga electron volts or
billion electron volts so in 1966 there
already was working accelerator at CERN
it was called the proton synchrotron it
been working since 1959 and it could
reach energies of 28 Giga electron Ball
so a proton is about one Giga electron
volts in energy just for comparison and
it was the world's most energetic
particle accelerator at the time but it
didn't hold that title for long because
later in 1966 the Stanford Linear
Accelerator was switched on accelerating
electrons up to 30 digger electron volts
along a three kilometer long straight
tunnel it's still in operation today and
it's the largest linear accelerator in
the world still it's been responsible
for three different nobel prizes
including proving that protons and
neutrons were actually made of even
smaller particles that were actually the
real fundamental smallest things that
you could get to that we now call quarks
but even though it is the world's
largest linear accelerator to this day
it still doesn't have enough energy to
produce a Higgs boson into the 1970s
though and it really was time for
circular particle accelerators to shine
because you can reach much higher energy
with those so including the Tevatron at
Fermilab in illinois u.s.a the clues
should be in the name here Tevatron ie
this part of accelerator was designed to
eventually reach energies of 1,000 Giga
electron volts or a tether electron volt
hello yes
editing Becky here pretty sure I just
said tether electron volts when I
definitely meant Tara electron volts
let's hope I don't do that again all the
way through this video it wasn't long
after that later in 1976 the super
proton synchrotron was switched on at
CERN that was also then reaching
energies of 400 Giga electron volts now
when I talk about these energies I'm
talking about in a single beam of
particles going around these
accelerators but often they have two
beams of particles going in opposite
directions that they then bring together
to collide so if you collide one beam
going in one direction and one beam
going in the other direction both with
500 GeV then you're going to have a
resultant energy of a thousand GeV or
yet have at ever a tetra Kewanee say
tetra at ever electron volt
look where's our heart okay I just keep
saying TEVAR electron-volt
throughout the rest of the video and
let's just all pretend it doesn't happen
okay in 1986 the Tevatron finally
managed to reach its peak energy of 900
Giga electron volts per beat meaning
that its total energy with one point 8
TeV it was around this time that the
large electron positron Collider started
to be built certain what came to be
known as the lab they were building this
new large circular accelerator in a 27
kilometer tunnel a hundred metres
underground now that tunnel is what
hosts today the Large Hadron Collider or
the LHC the very famous accelerator at
CERN but in the 80s at the time it was
hosting the left which could reach
energies of two hundred and eight Giga
electron volts per beam by 1995 the
Tevatron of Fermilab had managed to
confirm the existence of the top quark
the absolute heaviest of those most
fundamental particles that are the basic
building blocks of the universe and this
was a real boost to the hunt for the
Higgs boson because a it was sort of a
relief that we could produce something
that heavy in these particle
accelerators but also because it was a
prediction of the best model of particle
physics of which the Higgs boson sort of
underpinned everything so at this point
you might be seeing Becky
you said the eventual mass of the Higgs
boson that was found was 125 GeV and now
we've got particle accelerators in the
mid 90s that are reaching 1,800 GeV or
1.8 TV so why hunt the Higgs boson been
found yet because you've put enough
energy in to get that energy out with
the thing as the production of the Higgs
boson is incredibly rare the standard
model actually predicts how many
different ways you could actually make
the Higgs boson and how rare each of
those channels would be so the most
likely way that's gonna happen 60% of
the time is that if you create a Higgs
boson it decays into two quarks a bottom
quark and an anti bottom quark so for a
long time what people were trying to
detect was bottom quarks button so for
example say you made a trillion
different particles in a single
collision of two of these beams in a
particle accelerator maybe ten of those
would actually be a Higgs boson that
would then decay into something that we
could detect so yes first of all your
particle accelerator has to have enough
energy to make say ten Higgs bosons but
it also has to have enough energy to
make the 999 billion nine hundred ninety
nine million nine hundred ninety nine
thousand nine hundred ninety other
particles that are made in that big
particle soup that comes out of one of
those collisions plus it's not just
enough to make one or ten Higgs bosons
you've got to make loads of them in
order to be able to make sure that the
signal you can actually pick that out
amongst everything else every other
particle that has a similar energy and
that sort of range in fact that
background of other particles where
those energies you know you could really
call that a background noise if you want
it's actually a hundred billion times
larger than this signal that you'd get
from the Higgs boson so it's not exactly
easy and you want to model every single
event or decay or particle that could
have an energy in that regime that
you're searching in and then you want to
simulate how many of those events would
happen and then you'd count all those
events and then any signal you got above
that you'd know would be the Higgs boson
but of course they didn't know what
energy or mass regime to do that in so
really what the focus turned to in the
2000s was ruling out areas that it
couldn't be drilling down those energy
ranges and saying nope it's definitely
not under there because you've accounted
for everything and we don't see any
extra signal now that's exactly what the
let managed to do in 2001 it ruled out
any energy under a hundred and fifteen
Giga electron volts now what we didn't
know at the time was that although the
let have been designed maybe to produce
the Higgs boson the electrons and
positrons that were being
lighted in that which an electron its
antiparticle they're very light
particles and the Higgs boson it likes
heavy things so it was extremely
unlikely that you would ever have made
something with the electron and
positrons that were being collided
together in the lab after this though
the let was actually dismantled to make
way for the equipment for the Large
Hadron Collider the exact same tunnel
but with much better particle
accelerator technology so better magnets
that would give you more control over
the beam and allow you to accelerate up
to much higher speeds and energies it
was an experiment that was specifically
designed to detect the Higgs boson and
it was done really well as well because
they put two detectors in there Atlas
and CMS that worked independently
without talking to each other so they
get really reliable reproducible science
out of it to make sure that if they did
detect anything then it was the Higgs
boson but obviously there was then a gap
between the let being switched off and
the LHC being switched on about seven
years so in 2004 the Tevatron was the
most likely place that the Higgs boson
was going to be found if they could find
it and you can bet the team there really
what it's the people that found it so
you spent a lot of the efforts again
sort of drilling down on those energy
rages that it wasn't to try and get an
energy range that it was so that by 2007
they drilled it down to have somewhere
in the range of a hundred and seventeen
Giga electron volts to a hundred and
fifty-three they get electron volts then
in 2008 the LHC was switched on for the
first time and if you remember that day
you will remember like mass hysteria in
the media that they were gonna create
this giant black hole by accelerating
these protons around and again this was
because probably it was the first time
that people had ever really come across
this idea of particle accelerator but in
reality it was just one step up this
sort of energy ladder of particle
accelerators it really wasn't that
different from the Tevatron that had
been in use since the 70s in the USA
when that first switch one happened two
proton beams both went around
the circular tunnel Energy's just under
atever electron volts so unprecedented
energy levels even with its first switch
on you know before all those upgrades
came but unfortunately a very small
error with its magnets we've caused a
little bit of an explosion shut it down
for a year or so in that time obviously
the Tevatron was back to being the most
likely place that you could detect the
Higgs boson I think at the time they
even sort of confidently stated that by
the end of the decade they had a 50%
chance of detecting the Higgs boson
you know rumors were flying all over the
internet in 2009 that they had actually
done that but they were proved to be
false I guess that was 2009 s version of
fake news ah to go back to simpler times
like that but with the LHC magnet
problem soon fixed in 2010 the LHC was
back up and running with a combined beam
energy of 7 TeV almost 4 times greater
than anything the Tevatron had ever been
able to achieve the LHC also had much
more control over its beams because the
accelerator technology had just advanced
so much in that time it gave them much
more precision when bringing the beams
together much more control it meant that
more collisions came out when any of the
beams were ever brought together more
collisions meant more rare events would
be produced more rare events being
produced mean that there'd be more
chance of trying to spot that signal
from the Higgs boson the Tevatron just
couldn't compete with that unfortunately
and so at the end of 2011 it did its
last collision and was eventually shut
down the LHC was an idle in that time
obviously they've been doing lots and
lots of collisions themselves they've
managed to drill down the energy regime
once again where the Higgs boson could
be found so by end of 2011 there was
rumors flying again that some signal had
been found but obviously it wasn't high
enough above that background noise for
them to announce it to the world yet but
then in July 2012 there was 3 very
exciting days for the search for the
the first came on the 2nd of July 2012
probably announced them because Cernan
announced they were doing a press
conference on the 4th of July and people
were very excited for what they had to
say but on the 2nd of July the Tevatron
actually announced what it had found
from sort of its last gasp of collisions
that it was done in 2011 so the team
that actually analyzed 50 trillion
collisions that had happened in the
space between 2001 and 2011 and they
confirmed that they actually had found a
signal that was in the energy regime of
115 to 135 Giga electron volts but the
theme was that signal although it was
there it wasn't what's called
statistically significant so there was a
one in 550 chance that that was actually
not real that signal now that kind of
probability we put a number on that
let's do a sort of the standard
deviation because Sigma its 2.9 Sigma
that would be enough for us nonnamous
for us to physicists would be like hey
we found it we've definitely found
something that's a discovery particle
physicists though real sticklers for
discoveries and so they will not
announce that anything has been found
until they reach the 5 Sigma level that
means that there'd be a 1 in about 3
million chance of any signal that was
seen not being real but of course then
had their press conference scheduled for
the 4th of July 2012 and so we didn't
really have to wait long for that 5
Sigma announcement this press conference
you know everyone from Peter Higgs and
Francois Engelbert was invited so the
hype was definitely there people really
knew what was going on and it was there
that the two teams that have been
working independently on the two
detectors the Atlas detector the CMS
detector both announced that they had
found a signal in their data way above
the background noise our 5 Sigma
significance of this bump at about 125
Giga electron volts which could only be
explained by the existence of a new
boson it this is possibly one of my
favorite gifts I've ever seen come out
of CERN it shows you how this signal
actually built a
over time that's sort of the black data
points there and then the histograms
underneath show you sort of the expected
amounts from the model of how many of
those different decay tracks would
produce particles of those energies and
so any difference between those black
points and the histograms is essentially
the signal from the Higgs boson and
that's what they presented in their
papers where they showed that nice
little bump at 125 Giga electron volts
that was like oh there's the Higgs boson
and this day was practically Christmas
come early for the people who worked at
CERN and you can bet when I went over
there I wanted them to tell me
everything that they could remember
about that fateful day when the most
exciting days of my life okay I mean
there was the tension of building up
because there was a will they won't lay
for a while okay nobody and it came very
very fast but that day okay was just
like I mean I did I sort of regret this
now I didn't say I didn't sleep
overnight on the hallways like a lot of
people did today
well a massive big slumber party a
massive massive big slumber party okay a
lot of the UK students were doing that
huge party every waiting to get into the
lecture theater we we knew that the
announcement was gonna happen I mean
there was an announcement in 2011 with
some updates and we knew it was a
massive thing and some of my friends
said why don't we try and get into the
room and we knew the only way of getting
into the room would be the first people
at the queue outside so we turned up at
midnight the night before the
announcements and we had snacks we had
laptops with movies like pillows and
blankets and we camped there all night
we were about 10th or 11th into the room
Wow and so I was right at the back in
the middle and got to watch the whole
thing life though we had I think an hour
talk from each of the experiments and
then at the end the DJ at the time Ralph
Moya was like I think we've got it and
there was cheers and I mean there's this
famous photo of Peter Higgs with teary
eyes because you know he got to see his
theory yeah that you worked on with
other theorists yeah very inspiring as a
young side
to been able to be there and to feel
part of the moment and then to God to
work on the Higgs myself afterwards it's
it was very special yeah and then we
celebrated in the restaurant here at
CERN afterwards people knew which ones
the Brits were cuz we had a bottle of
films on the table the way we celebrated
was we had a Hicks tbq okay with the
invite this is how we celebrated Higgs
dependence day no I spoke these dude
Higgs dependence days my favorite
editing Becky here you're gonna hear me
refer to Francois Englert as France was
Engelbert throughout the rest of this
video he's not ankle but Humperdinck
Becky get it right it didn't take long
for more celebrations to come around
because in 2013 the Nobel Prize in
Physics was awarded to Peter Higgs and
Francois Engelbert for their prediction
of the Higgs field and the Higgs boson
you know nearly 50 years before it was
experimentally confirmed it was a bit
controversial at a time because there
was actually six people on those three
papers that were published in 1964 plus
then obviously the thousands and
thousands of people that had worked at
CERN on the Atlas detectors the CMS
detector building the LHC of course the
Tevatron team as well which you know
were involved in really drilling down
those energy ranges so the LHC knew
where to look
that's probably over like tens of
thousands of people and yet the nobel
prize can only be given to a maximum of
three people doesn't really seem
relevant for the way that modern science
works but what now though we obviously
don't know everything there is still to
know otherwise particle physicists would
all be out of a job
obviously so what questions are particle
physicists still asking now back in 2012
we discovered it you notice the paper
does not say is the Higgs boson no
mention of the Higgs is not the Higgs
boson because nobody knew as the Higgs
boson the time we just knew there's a
new scalar particle which had spins spin
not equal to one okay and that was that
was the discovery but it kind of looked
like the Higgs boson quite like the
creeks boson surreal kind of quite
excited the scientific standard is much
higher to say because I mean it really
was very clearly the expose
but scientifically having proven right
so the first thing we had to do is we
had to figure out that it wasn't exposed
and measuring how it decays of different
particles because they exposed on the
decays are completely fixed it's very
well predicted how's that for your
behaviour completely this theories very
good so we had to measure it check that
it was a spin zero particle that it
could take aid and the right things and
it took us to 2013 okay actually I was
in the conference where we decided it
was a hey a Higgs boson at this point it
was not the Higgs boson this point but
it was a Higgs boson made the criteria
for explosion and then we've been
looking at trying to actually measure
this case to other channels because just
because it decayed so the Higgs boson
gives some mass to vector bosons the W
and Z and it also gives master fermions
so like electrons muons quacks I know
well it took a while to actually see it
decay into fermions and we weren't sure
if this was it hiccup ozone only gave it
this was a Higgs boson that only gave up
to electroweak symmetry and there was
another Higgs boson that generation for
fermions until we actually saw it okay
and in fact the its it took her it took
us a little while to see those evidence
in towel and BBB but it was odd to see
it and I think 2018 is when we actually
first saw it going to UM bottom quarks
which again is 60% of the decays but
it's so hot they're so hard to find so
again showing that we actually can
measure at that point it was very clear
that it was now the Higgs boson and
we're still trying to measure all the
other branching properties of it seeing
it checking all the decays that matter
understand model and the reason for this
is the Higgs boson is the wonderful
portal to new physics and one of the
biggest driving factor is actually for
new physics is the the galactic rotation
curve see dark matter
so everything's spending much too
quickly and if we measure the mass of
the luminous matter there it doesn't
quite work and you have to put in this
non luminous
ie non interacting with electromagnetic
feed to hold everything in with an
opposite gravitational effect so we look
for things like this and supersymmetry
is one of many possible extensions you
know their attack model dark matter
models
like this and then exotic physics super
exotic states of matter
a very unusual combination of quarks so
we have a lot of work today I mean
there's so much left to do in the future
before everything was quite Theory led
so the standard model was excellent and
the theorists were able to say oh
there's probably a top quark and Murray
gell-mann was able to say oh there's
probably all of these Nissan's and then
in the 70s and 80s there's an explosion
of all these discoveries because he was
right you know and theoretically
predicted this and the same with the
Higgs it was predicted so we knew that
it should be of some mass and it has to
be there somewhere
but diets we know what's wrong with the
standard model but not really how to fix
it
so particle physics is doing all right
we've got this wonderful model but we've
so far explained 4% of the universe
there's room for improvement and we're
also missing a fundamental force gravity
so you know there's work to do
ok this how the model is not complete um
so we think there's new physics out
there and we're wimps
Dark Matter candidates as we think
there's a heavy particle out there which
is forming what we would call is dark
matter which we see some gravitational
effects Dark Matter obviously has mass
Higgs boson generates mass Higgs boson
should like like that matter this is the
so now we can now we know exactly where
to look for the Higgs boson we can start
seeing it is it decay into something is
it decay into dark matter and yeah this
is quite challenging because we can't
see dark matter so we have it's Higgs to
invisible somewhat think think we need
is we need data we need number of hexes
so Higgs decays need these decays we're
looking at are rare I mean you're a lot
Higgs for it and luckily we've got the
high luminous THC which so next thing
coming up 2027 okay I think though their
schedule is changing so coming up in a
few years and right now we're preparing
for that right now and this and it
because right it's the only see right
now is still actually early in its
program we've taken five percent of the
data we plan to take of the LHC program
Wow
so we have we have a lot we have a lot
coming most incredible thing about being
here is knowing that you are surrounded
by the history of the Higgs boson in
essence like it's not just that you know
like you think people like angler and
heggs could have walked these halls but
it's the other thousands of mine
what these holes throughout the
development of the theory and then the
experiments and leading to the discovery
of Higgs as well this place is just so
incredibly inspiring and it almost makes
you wonder like what is the future gonna
hold in terms of our understanding of
the universe and what will particle
physics bring us next Zoe gets the
bloopers I just want to say a massive
thank you to curiosity stream here with
a sponsor of this week's video for
essentially funding my trip out here to
CERN curiosity stream is a streaming
service for documentaries and non
fiction films on pretty much any subject
that you can imagine from science to
history to art to anything that you're
really interested in you want to hear
more about particle physics after
watching this week's video then they've
got you covered
usually curiosity streams plan is just
$20 a year however with their new stay
in and stay curious campaign because
let's face it none of us are going
anywhere we're all under quarantine
right now they have dropped this to just
$12 a year go to curiosity stream comm
/dr Becky that's DRB ec k why to access
the world's finest documentaries and
nonfiction series and best of all for my
subscribers if you enter the promo code
dr. Becky D RBE CKY
during the signup process you'll get
your first 30 days completely free by
1995 the Tevatron at by 1995 the
Tevatron at fermilab had actually
managed by 1995 the Tevatron at fermilab
yeah in 2001 that's exactly what the lek
did it ruled out any energy under a
hundred and fifteen Giga electron volts
and was shortly switched down switch
down that's not a word it was only
actually in the press conference there
anyone stay today to have a Tron I just
I can't get over the name like it just
to me it sounds like it's a transformer
right that it's like Megatron's best
friend for ah no just picturing this
huge a big lorry thing just like like up
to this big like giant robot thing
that's like a no I am Tevatron I
I've come to save earth don't blame it
on the stand sure don't moonlight don't
live it on the good times blame it on
the Higgs boson
you